Livermore Secret Market Key
Printed exactly as 1940 edition
Livermore Market Key
The Livermore Market Key section has been placed in this book exactly as it was written in the 1940 version originally Published by Duell, Sloan and Pearce, New York. All explanatory charts have also been added in their original condition. This section of the book contains reprints of his actual worksheets; complete with Livermore’s own day-to-day comments on his system as it applied to actual market action in specific stocks.
The prudent stock market student, after reading and studying this section, will observe that some of the numbers used by Livermore as examples are difficult to follow.
We have attempted to understand these various examples, even so far as going to the second edition which was published in 1966 by Investor’s Press, Inc. of Palisades Park, New Jersey. Our objective was to see if there were any problems with the actual worksheets that we may not have noticed in the original 1940 published version.
There were no discrepancies-this is exactly as Livermore presented his Market Key Theory.
RICHARD SMITTEN
THE LIVERMORE MARKET KEY
MANY years of my life had been devoted to speculation before it dawned upon me that nothing new was happening in the stock market, that price movements were simply being repeated, that while there was variation in different stocks the general price pattern was the same.
 The urge fell upon me, as I have said, to keep price records that might be a guide to price movements. This I undertook with some zest. Then I began striving to find a point to start from in helping me to anticipate future movements. That was no easy task.
Now I can look back on those initial efforts and understand why they were not immediately fruitful. Having then a purely speculative mind, I was trying to devise a policy for trading in and out of the market all the time, catching the small intermediate moves. This was wrong, and in time I clearly recognized the fact.
I continued keeping my records, confident that they had a genuine value which only awaited my discovery. At length the secret unfolded. The records told me plainly that they would do nothing for me in the way of intermediate movements. But if I would but use my eyes, I would see the formation of patterns that would foretell major movements.
Right then I determined to eliminate all the minor movements.
By continued close study of the many records I had kept the realization struck me that the time element was vital in forming a correct opinion as to the approach of the really important movements. With renewed vigor I concentrated on that feature. What I wanted to discover was a method of recognizing what constituted the minor swings. I realized a market in a definite trend still had numerous intermediate oscillations. They had been confusing. They were no longer to be my concern.
I wanted to find out what constituted the beginning of a Natural Reaction or a Natural Rally. So I began checking the distances of price movements. First I based my calculations on one point. That was no good. Then two points, and so on, until finally I arrived at a point that represented what I thought should constitute the beginning of a Natural Reaction or Natural Rally.
To simplify the picture I had printed a special sheet of paper, ruled in distinctive columns, and so arranged as to give me what I term my Map for Anticipating Future Movements. For each stock I use six columns. Prices are recorded in the columns as they occur. Each column has its heading.
First column is headed Secondary Rally. 
Second is headed Natural Rally.
Third is headed Upward Trend.

Fourth is headed Downward Trend. 
Fifth is headed Natural Reaction. 
Sixth is headed Secondary Reaction.
When figures are recorded in the Upward Trend column they are entered in black ink. In the next two columns to the left I insert the figures in pencil. When figures are recorded in the Downward Trend column they are entered in red ink, and in the next two columns to the right, the entries are also made in pencil.
Thus when recording the prices either in the Upward Trend column or in the Downward Trend column I am impressed with the actual trend at the time. Those figures in distinctive ink talk to me. The red ink or the black ink, used persistently, tells a story that is unmistakable.
When the pencil remains in use I realize I am simply noting the natural oscillations. (In the reproduction of my records later on, bear in mind that the prices entered in light blue ink are those for which I use a pencil on my sheets).
I decided a stock selling around $30.00 or higher would have to rally or react from an extreme point to the extent of approximately six points before I could recognize that a Natural Rally or Natural Reaction was in the making. This rally or reaction does not indicate that the trend of the market has changed its course. It simply indicates that the market is experiencing a natural movement. The trend is exactly the same as it was before the rally or reaction occurred.
I would here explain that I do not take the action of a single stock as an indication that the trend has been positively changed for that group. Instead I take the combined action of two stocks in any group before I recognize the trend has definitely changed, hence the Key Price. By combining the prices and movements in these two stocks I arrive at what I call my Key Price. I find that an individual stock sometimes has a movement big enough to put it in my Upward Trend column or my Downward Trend column. But there is danger of being caught in a false movement by depending upon only one stock. The movement of the two stocks combined gives reasonable assurance. Thus, a positive change of the trend must be confirmed by the action of the Key Price.
Let me illustrate this Key Price method. Strictly adhering to the six- point movement to be used as a basis, you will note in my subsequent

 records that at times I record a price in U.S. Steel if it only has had a move, let us say, of 51⁄8 points because you will find a corresponding movement in Bethlehem Steel, say, of 7 points. Taken together the price movements of the two stocks constitute the Key Price. This Key Price, then, totals twelve points or better, the proper distance required.
When a recording point has been reached—that is, a move of six points average by each of the two stocks—I continue to set down in that same column the extreme price made any day, whenever it is higher than the last price recorded in the Upward Trend column or is lower than the last price recorded in the Downward Trend column. This goes on until a reverse movement starts. This later movement in the other direction will, of course, be based on the same six points average, or twelve points for the Key Price.
You will notice that from then on I never deviate from those points. I make no exceptions. Nor do I make excuses, if the results are not exactly as I anticipated. Remember, these prices I set forth in my records are not my prices. These points have been determined by actual prices registered in the day’s trading.
It would be presumptuous for me to say I had arrived at the exact point from which my record of prices should start. It would also be misleading and insincere. I can only say that after years of checking and observation I feel I have arrived somewhere near a point that can be used as a basis for keeping records. From these records one can visualize a map useful in determining the approach of important price movements.
Someone has said that success rides upon the hour of decision.
Certainly success with this plan depends upon courage to act and act promptly when your records tell you to do so. There is no place for vacillation. You must train your mind along those lines. If you are going to wait upon someone else for explanations or reasons or reassurances, the time for action will have escaped.
To give an illustration: After the rapid advance all stocks had following the declaration of war in Europe, a Natural Reaction occurred in the whole market. Then all the stocks in the four prominent groups recovered their reaction and all sold at new high prices—with the exception of the stocks in the Steel group. Anyone keeping records according to my method would have had their attention drawn very forcefully to the action of the Steel stocks. Now there must have been a very good reason why the

 Steel stocks refused to continue their advance along with the other groups. There was a good reason! But at the time I did not know it, and I doubt very much that anyone could have given a valid explanation for it. However, anyone who had been recording prices would have realized by the action of the Steel stocks that the upward movement in the Steel group had ended. It was not until the middle of January 1940, four months later, that the public was given the facts and the action of the Steel stocks was explained. An announcement was made that during that time the English Government had disposed of over 100,000 shares of U.S. Steel, and in addition Canada had sold 20,000 shares. When that announcement was made the price of U.S. Steel was 26 points lower than its high price attained in September 1939 and Bethlehem Steel was 29 points lower, whereas the prices of the other three prominent groups were off only 21⁄2 to 123⁄4 points from the high prices that were made at the same time the Steels made their highs. This incident proves the folly of trying to find out “a good reason” why you should buy or sell a given stock. If you wait until you have the reason given you, you will have missed the opportunity of having acted at the proper time! The only reason an investor or speculator should ever want to have pointed out to him is the action of the market itself. Whenever the market does not act right or in the way it should—that is reason enough for you to change your opinion and change it immediately. Remember: there is always a reason for a stock acting the way it does. But also remember: the chances are that you will not become acquainted with that reason until some time in the future, when it is too late to act on it profitably.
I repeat that the formula does not provide points whereby you can make additional trades, with assurance, on intermediate fluctuations which occur during a major move. The intent is to catch the major moves, to indicate the beginning and the end of movements of importance. And for such purpose you will find the formula of singular value if faithfully pursued. It should, perhaps, also be repeated that this formula is designed for active stocks selling above an approximate price of 30. While the same basic principles are of course operative in anticipating the market action of all stocks, certain adjustments in the formula must be made in considering the very low-priced issues.
There is nothing complicated about it. The various phases will be absorbed quickly and with easy understanding by those who are interested.

 In the next chapter is given the exact reproduction of my records, with full explanation of the figures which I have entered.
EXPLANATORY RULES
1 Record prices in Upward Trend Column in black ink. 
2 Record prices in Downward Trend column in red ink. 
3 Record prices in the other four columns in pencil.

4 (a) Draw red lines under your last recorded price in the Upward Trend column the first day you start to record figures in the Natural Reaction column. You begin to do this on the first reaction of approximately six points from the last price recorded in the Upward Trend column.
(b) Draw red lines under your last recorded price in the Natural Reaction column the first day you start to record figures in the Natural Rally column or in the Upward Trend column. You begin to do this on the first rally of approximately six points from the last price recorded in the Natural Reaction column.
You now have two Pivotal Points to watch, and depending on how prices are recorded when the market returns to around one of those points, you will then be able to form an opinion as to whether the positive trend is going to be resumed in earnest—or whether the movement has ended.
(c) Draw black lines under your last recorded price in the Downward Trend column the first day you start to record figures in the Natural Rally column. You begin to do this on the first rally of approximately six points from the last price recorded in the Downward Trend column.
(d) Draw black lines under your last recorded price in the Natural Rally column the first day you start to record figures in the Natural Reaction column or in the Downward Trend column. You begin to do this on the first reaction of approximately six points from the last price recorded in the Natural Rally column.

5 (a) When recording in the Natural Rally column and a price is reached that is three or more points above the last price recorded in the Natural Rally column (with black lines underneath), then that price should be entered in black ink in the Upward Trend column.

(b) When recording in the Natural Reaction column and a price is reached that is three or more points below the last price recorded in the Natural Reaction column (with red lines underneath), then that price should be entered in red ink in the Downward Trend column.

6 (a) When a reaction occurs to an extent of approximately six points, after you have been recording prices in the Upward Trend column, you then start to record those prices in the Natural Reaction column, and continue to do so every day thereafter that the stock sells at a price which is lower than the last recorded price in the Natural Reaction column.
(b) When a reaction occurs to an extent of approximately six points, after you have been recording prices in the Natural Rally column, you then start to record those prices in the Natural Reaction column, and continue to do so every day thereafter that the stock sells at a price which is lower than the last recorded price in the Natural Reaction column. In case a price is made which is lower than the last recorded price in the Downward Trend column, you would then record that price in the Downward Trend column.
(c) When a rally occurs to an extent of approximately six points, after you have been recording prices in the Downward Trend column, you then start to record those prices in the Natural Rally column, and continue to do so every day thereafter that the stock sells at a price which is higher than the last recorded price in the Natural Rally column.

 (d) When a rally occurs to an extent of approximately six points, after you have been recording prices in the Natural Reaction column, you then start to record those prices in the Natural Rally column, and continue to do so every day thereafter that the stock sells at a price which is higher than the last recorded price in the Natural Rally column. In case a price is made which is higher than the last recorded price in the Upward Trend column, you would then record that price in the Upward Trend column.

(e) When you start to record figures in the Natural Reaction column and a price is reached that is lower than the last recorded figure in the Downward Trend column— then that price should be entered in red ink in the Downward Trend column.

(f) The same rule applies when you are recording figures in the Natural Rally column and a price is reached that is higher than the last price recorded in the Upward Trend column—then you would cease recording in the Natural Rally column and record that price in black ink in the Upward Trend column.

(g) In case you had been recording in the Natural Reaction column and a rally should occur of approximately six points from the last recorded figure in the Natural Reaction column—but that price did not exceed the last price recorded in the Natural Rally column—that price should be recorded in the Secondary Rally column and should continue to be so recorded until a price had been made which exceeded the last figure recorded in the Natural Rally column. When that occurs, you should commence to record prices in the Naturally Rally column once again.

(h) In case you have been recording in the Natural Rally column and a reaction should occur of approximately six points, but the price reached on that reaction was not lower than the last recorded figure in your Natural Reaction column—that price should be entered in your Secondary Reaction column, and you should continue to record prices in that column until a price was made that was lower than the last price recorded in the Natural Reaction column. When that occurs,

 you should commence to record prices in the Natural Reaction column once again.

7 The same rules apply when recording the Key Price—except that you use twelve points as a basis instead of six points used in individual stocks.
8 The last price recorded in the Downward or Upward Trend columns becomes a Pivotal Point as soon as you begin to record prices in the Natural Rally or Natural Reaction columns. After a rally or reaction has ended you start to record again in the reverse column, and the extreme price made in the previous column then becomes another Pivotal Point.
It is after two Pivotal Point have been reached that these records become of great value to you in helping you anticipate correctly the next movement of importance. These Pivotal Points are drawn to your attention by having a double line drawn underneath them in either red ink or black ink. Those lines are drawn for the express purpose of keeping those points before you, and should be watched very carefully whenever prices are made and recorded near or at one of those points. Your decision to act will then depend on how prices are recorded from then on.
9 (a) When you see black lines drawn below the last recorded red-ink figure in the Downward Trend column—you may be given a signal to buy near that point.
(b) When black lines are drawn below a price recorded in the Natural Rally column, and if the stock on its next rally reaches a point near that Pivotal Point price, that is the time you are going to find out whether the market is strong enough definitely to change its course into the Upward Trend column.
(c) The reverse holds true when you see red lines drawn under the last price recorded in the Upward Trend column, and when red lines are drawn below the last price recorded in the Natural Reaction column.

10 (a) This whole method is designed to enable one to see clearly whether a stock is acting the way it ought to, after its first Natural Rally or Reaction has occurred. If the movement is going to be resumed in a positive manner—either up or down—it will carry through its previous Pivotal Point—in individual stocks by three points, or, in the Key Price by six points.
(b) If the stock fails to do this—and in a reaction sells three points or more below the last Pivotal Point (recorded in the Upward Trend column with red lines drawn underneath), it would indicate that the Upward Trend in the stock is over.
(c) Applying the rule to the Downward Trend: Whenever, after a Natural Rally has ended, new prices are being recorded in the Downward Trend column, these new prices must extend three or more points below the last Pivotal Point (with black lines underneath), if the Downward Trend is to be positively resumed.
(d) If the stock fails to do this, and on a rally sells three or more points above the last Pivotal Point (recorded in the Downward Trend column with black lines drawn underneath), it would indicate that the Downward Trend in the stock is over.
(e) When recording in the Natural Rally column, if the rally ends a short distance below the last Pivotal Point in the Upward Trend column (with red lines underneath), and the stock reacts three or more points from that price, it is a danger signal, which would indicate the Upward Trend in that stock is over.
(f) When recording in the Natural Reaction column, if the reaction ends a short distance above the last Pivotal Point in the Downward Trend column (with black lines underneath), and the stock rallies three or more points from that price, it is a danger signal, which would indicate the Downward Trend in that stock is over.